feat: migration guide analytics (#830)
ZupIT/beagle-docs: content/en/article/migration-guide-analytics2.md

---
title: "Guide to migrate from Beagle Analytics 1.0 to Beagle Analytics 2.0"
linkTitle: "Migrating to Beagle Analytics 2"
weight: 1
description: >-
  In this section we describe Beagle Analytics in general walking you through the migration to Beagle Analytics version 2.
---

---

## What is Beagle Analytics?

Analytics is a Beagle feature that tags certain events such as clicking in a component or loading a screen.

## About Analytics 1.0

> In it's first version, you would have to implement a `ClickEvent` or a `ScreenEvent` in the Backend, as in the example below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In its first version, you would have to implement a `ClickEvent` or a `ScreenEvent` in the Backend, as shown in the example below:
```

```kotlin
ClickEvent(
   category = "category-button",

>    label = "Label-button",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   label = "label-button",
```

   value = "value-button"
)
```

```kotlin
ScreenEvent(
   screenName = "FALLBACK"
)
```

> Each event had to be declared in it's own component on the backend, for example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each event had to be declared in its own component defined on the backend, for example:
```

{{% alert color="success" %}}
The *`button`* component had a property called *`ClickAnalyticEvent`* that would receive a *`ClickEvent`*.
{{% /alert %}}

{{% alert color="success" %}}
A *`Screen`* had a property called *`ScreenAnalyticEvent`* that would receive an *`ScreenEvent`*.
{{% /alert %}}

We have listed an example bellow for a *`Button`* component declared at the backend and configured with an analytic event:

```kotlin
Button(
   text = "Analytics 1",
   onPress = listOf(
       Alert("Analytics 1", "Trying again!")
   ),
   clickAnalyticsEvent = ClickEvent(
       category = "category-button",
       label = "Label-button",
       value = "value-button"
   )
)
```

> Once declared in the Backend, the events *(with the information listed in them)* could be retrieved in the Frontend using a custom class to handle them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once declared in the Backend, the events *(with the information listed in them)* could be retrieved from the frontend using a custom class to handle them.
```

* This class must extend itself from a Beagle inner class called *`Analytics`*. This class gathers event information into an object called *`event`*. You can check the Android signature for reference below:

```kotlin
@BeagleComponent
class SampleAnalytics: Analytics {
   override fun trackEventOnClick(event: ClickEvent) {
       //This code block will run when a ClickEvent is received
  Log.i("analytics1", "$event")
   }
   override fun trackEventOnScreenAppeared(event: ScreenEvent) {
       //This code block will run when a Screen is rendered
  Log.i("analytics1", "screenUp -> "+ event.screenName)
   }
   override fun trackEventOnScreenDisappeared(event: ScreenEvent) {
       //This code block will run when a Screen disappears
   }
}
```

{{% alert color="success" %}}
whenever an event occurs (such as a ``click``, or the appearance or disappearance of a ``screen``) the functions above are triggered)
{{% /alert %}}

## About Analytics 2.0

> Analytics 2.0 has improved the way events can be declared in the backend and retrieved in the frontend, and more. It is possible now to enable *`tracking`* for actions and properties without having to map events in the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Analytics 2.0 has highly improved the control over the tracking of Beagle Events. These can still be mapped in the backend and retrieved from frontend but now it also possible to enable *`tracking`* for actions and its properties directly from your app without even having to map them in the backend.
```
